# Week 3a: Tools

This week we get down to coding.

First, let's start off with a relatively simple exercise.  Let's compute the
estimated mean.  Assume that we had the values `X = [8, 7, 9, 1, 5]` let's us
python to compute the mean.  First, in the shell, start python and let's go!

    X = [8, 7, 9, 1, 5]

    acc = 0
    for xi in X:
        acc += xi
    x_hat = acc / len(X)

And, since we are good at programming let's put that in a function

    def mean(X):
        acc = 0
        for xi in X:
            acc += xi
        return acc / len(X)


    X = [8, 7, 9, 1, 5]
    mean(X)

Great!  But, now observe that for the semester, we are going to be working with
vectors and matrices and after a while, these loops are going to start to become
annoying.  So, we will use a few tools to help us out.  The first we will see is
numpy!  But, note that we don't want to just start adding packages to our
environment.  It turns out that that in a lot of data mining projects, you will
have a ton of opportunities to stand on the shoulders of giants by using
libraries, but in doing so, you can lead to one project breaking other projects.
So, we will start off by using a tool called
[conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) to help us.  Note that some of you may
have used pip before for managing python dependencies.  Conda has a similar
intention, but is a little more general (as it also works for other programming
languages.  See the article [Understanding Conda and
Pip](https://www.anaconda.com/blog/understanding-conda-and-pip) for more
details.  If you have not already installed conda, please see [conda install
docs](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html).

Now, let's get to environment.  First, let's use conda to create an environment.

    conda create --name csci347 python=3.8

And activate the environment

    conda activate csci347

We will use pip in the environment so let's install that and numpy

    conda install pip numpy

And get back to writing some python

    import numpy as np
    X = np.array([8, 7, 9, 1, 5])
    x_hat =  X.sum() / X.size

or just call the mean function directly!

    X.mean()

we can also get some other nice descriptive stats

    X.max()
    X.min()
    X.std()

Super! We also had a ton of time spent working with vectors and matrices last
week.  Numpy can help us with that too.  Let's create a matrix of 5 rows and 3
columns of some random data to play with.

    D = np.random.random((5, 3))

First, let's check out the shape of the data

    D.shape

And grab a specific value:

    D[0, 1]

And another value

    D[4, 2]


We can do tons of
[slicing and dicing (_**See User Docs**_)](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/user/quickstart.html#indexing-slicing-and-iterating)
but today we will just do some basics. Let's get the 0th column

    X0 = D[:, 0]

and the 2nd column

    X2 = D[:, 2]

and we can take the dot product of these two

    np.dot(X0, X2)

Great! We can even get values for the different norms that we talked about.  The
[np.linalg package](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/routines.linalg.html)
has tons of functionality, but we will just use the norm for now.

    d1 = np.linalg.norm(X2-X0, 1)
    d2 = np.linalg.norm(X2-X0, 2)

And, we can also scale by a number!  So to double our vector X0, we can multiply
by 2!

    2*X0

So, let's normalize our vector.  That is, make our vector length 1 (in the
2-norm).

    two_norm_of_X0 = np.linalg.norm(X0, 2)
    normalized_X0 = X0 / two_norm_of_X0

The above code is an example of what numpy (and now other libraries in the
python world call) ([broadcasting](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/user/basics.broadcasting.html)).
The idea behind broadcasting is that the system "stretches" objects to higher
dimensional objects so that operations can occur in a meaningful way.

The numpy docs have a nice [visualisation of broadcasting a number to a vector](
https://numpy.org/doc/stable/_images/broadcasting_1.png) and then using the
vector for an element-wise operation.

We could subtract a vector from a matrix

    D - np.array([1,2,3])

Add a vector to a matrix

    D + np.array([1,2,3])

We can use broadcasting for all sorts of applications.  Use the `mean` function
and broadcasting to to mean center your data:

    D-D.mean(axis=0)

or `linalg.norm` and broadcasting to scale your data so that each value is
between 0 and 1

    D/np.linalg.norm(D)

... while I don't have a great reason why you would do this, it illustrates a
useful function, write some code to mean center along the rows.  Check out docs
for [mean](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.mean.html) and
[transpose](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.transpose.html)
for some help.

    (D.transpose()-D.mean(axis=1)).transpose()

For one more exercise, let's compute the estimated variance for X0 (build up to
that mess)

    np.sum((X0-X0.mean())**2) / (X0.size-1)
    0.1324763690893323

but, as you would expect, we could have just used numpy to begin with:

    np.var((X0)
    0.10598109527146585

... they are different?!!  Do have an error?  I double checked my code many
times, what is going on here?  Let's check the docs for
[np.var](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.var.html)
and there is this ddof optional argument.  Ah, I see the problem "By default
*ddof* is zero".  The formula that we used in class was an unbiased estimate of
the variance.  So let's make sure we are using the right form:

    np.var(X0, ddof=1)
    0.1324763690893323

Bam!  And to confirm our suspicions about the API and the ddof, what if we used
the biased estimator of the variance:

    np.sum((X0-X0.mean())**2) / (X0.size)
    0.10598109527146585

that matches

    np.var((X0)
    0.10598109527146585

To quote [Josh
Starmer](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCtYLUTtgS3k1Fg4y5tAhLbw) Double Bam!

So the takeaway here is libraries are great, but make sure to check the docs or
you can end up with some pretty unexpected results.

## Google Colab

Sometimes, it is just easier though to work on something on the web.  So let's
check out google collab.  Go to
[https://colab.research.google.com/](https://colab.research.google.com/)
and create a new notebook.

Let's try some of what we did before but this notebook:

    def mean(X):
        acc = 0
        for xi in X:
            acc += xi
        return acc / len(X)


    X = [8, 7, 9, 1, 5]
    mean(X)

Okay, so that was way easier.  And in fact, for some major libraries, we don't
even need add dependencies:

    import numpy as np
    X = np.array([8, 7, 9, 1, 5])
    x_hat =  X.sum() / X.size

And what is even better, we can "weave" together text and code.

For example I can put in text:

    In the text, I can write markdown and then it is nicely rendered

    For example, here is my list of things I need to do this afternoon

    - eat a sandwitch
    - teach data mining
    - meet about yardstick
    - drive home
    - study the teachings of Topo Barktreuse

But where it really shines is when combing text and code.
So we can have some text to provide context and then use the code  to explain
what is going on.

    Prof Barktreuse collected data today about the snow levels the base of
    Levrich canyon.  We can sumarize her findings as:

and then add a code block

    import numpy as np
    sample_snow_depts = np.array((3, 7, 2, 4, 5, 6, 5, 5, 5))
    print(f"mean sample snow depth is {sample_snow_depts.mean()}")

and a text block

    She wanted to understand how much variabliltiy there was in the show around
    the base of the canyon so we can give an estimate the variance

and another code block

    print(f"the variance is {sample_snow_depts.var(ddof=1)}")

and provide even more context

    Note that when we called the variance function, we used the `ddof` argument,
    setting this to 1 makes this an unbiased estimator of the variance.  For why
    that is the case, see [Why dividing by N underestimates the
    variance](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sHRBg6BhKjI)


## Back to your system

This style of programming is not something that Google invented. And contrary to
what you may have learned in from somebody that loves R, it is not something
created by Hadley Wickham.  What we were doing was using a programming paradigm
created by Donald Knuth in the mid 1980's called [Literate
Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Literate_programming).  It has a ton
of great uses (especially in data science) but maybe most immediately, it can be
super useful when writing up your homework!

In fact, the tool you are using on collab, is just a web version of what is
called a [jupyter notebook](https://jupyter.org/) There are lots of things that
jupyter is useful for, but for the time being, we will just work with the
notebooks.  We can use conda to set up a jupyter notebook server locally by
running the following:

    conda install jupyter

and starting the notebook server locally (and show how we can do the same thing
as on collab with a slightly different interface.)
For the time being either is fine to use, whichever you are more comfortable
with.  I use both depending on which is easer for the thing I am trying to do.

A few other notes.  These environments can become very complex in complex
projects, so it is often a good idea to capture your environment and keep it in
version control.  Most often people keep it in a file called `environment.yml`.
We can export the environment with the following command:

    conda env export --file environment.yml

This produces a file called `environment.yml` take a look at it.  Note that
there is a line `prefix` in there.  To my knowledge, it doesn't really get used
anywhere but if you for are hesitant about giving out information about your
file system, you can always delete that line.

So, I clam we can just blow way the old environment and then  remake it, so
let's give it a try:

    conda activate base
    conda env remove -n csci347
    conda env list

and so it is gone.  Let's remake it:

    conda env create -f environment.yml

and to make sure, let's activate the `csci347` environment

    conda activate csci347

and just start a python shell and make sure that we can
import numpy

    import numpy as np
    np.random.random((3,2))

Great!  The carpentries is working on a really good tutorial for working with
environments in conda. You can see it as it evolves at the [Carpentries Incubaror](https://carpentries-incubator.github.io/introduction-to-conda-for-data-scientists/04-sharing-environments/index.html).


## Pandas

So far, we have investigated how to use numpy as a useful library for
implementing our primitive, but, often we are not given data as a matrix, but we
have to do some work to get it to that format.  Perhaps a format that is closer
to what we will see in practice is data in a csv.

For example, consider the first few lines of data about the titanic [from the pandas documentation](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pandas-dev/pandas/main/doc/data/titanic.csv)

    PassengerId,Survived,Pclass,Name,Sex,Age,SibSp,Parch,Ticket,Fare,Cabin,Embarked
    1,0,3,"Braund, Mr. Owen Harris",male,22,1,0,A/5 21171,7.25,,S
    2,1,1,"Cumings, Mrs. John Bradley (Florence Briggs Thayer)",female,38,1,0,PC 17599,71.2833,C85,C
    3,1,3,"Heikkinen, Miss. Laina",female,26,0,0,STON/O2. 3101282,7.925,,S
    4,1,1,"Futrelle, Mrs. Jacques Heath (Lily May Peel)",female,35,1,0,113803,53.1,C123,S
    5,0,3,"Allen, Mr. William Henry",male,35,0,0,373450,8.05,,S

Aside from the non-numeric, which will will see how to encode in a bit, each
column has meaningful names.  When we are working with this data, wouldn't it be
nice to refer to the fields by name instead of number.  (For example, column
"Survived" instead of column 1?).  [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/) is an
excellent library for working with tabular data.  Let's try out a few examples.
First, lets grab and load that titanic dataset.  From your notebook

    !curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pandas-dev/pandas/main/doc/data/titanic.csv --output titanic.csv

**Aside**: You could also run the command without the '!' from the terminal or
download it from your browser. Download it in the notebook arguably the best
option because it documents the location from where you fetched the data and
helps to make the process you arrived at the final result reproducible.  We
will likely talk about reproducible research though out the semester.

We can peak at the data with the following command

    !head titanic.csv

Okay, now let's install pandas and load this data in!  From the command line,
install pandas (make sure that you are working in the csci347 environment)

    conda install pandas

Great!  Let's hop back to our notebook. Import pandas and load the titanic data
and look at the first few lines:

    import pandas as pd
    D = pd.read_csv("./titanic.csv")
    D.head()

Look at how nice that data looks! So professional!  All joking aside... you
didn't really need to go though all those steps of downloading the data with
curl and whatnot to get the data.  I wanted to show you that so that you know
how to get any data over an http connection.  In reality, the following would
work to load the data directly from github

    D = pd.read_csv("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pandas-dev/pandas/main/doc/data/titanic.csv")

Probably, the first thing we will want to do with pandas is get subsets of the
data.  For example, let's say we wanted to get a single column of data such as
the passenger names.  We can acccess this data similar to how we would data in a
dictionary.

    D["PassengerId"]

Note that while we only got one column, we have two columns of data.  The first
column is the row number of the data, the second column is the passenger's name.
We can use the row numbers to access specific rows.  For example to get the 3rd
row.

    D["Name"][3]

but, we will often want to get multiple columns, For example, imagine we wanted
to get Name, Age, and if the passenger survived.   We can get multiple columns
with a standard python list:

    D[["Name", "Age", "Survived"]]

For those interested in the details of python.  The inner most list `["Name",
"Age", "Survived"]` is just a regular old python list and the outer `D[...]`
uses the python `__getitem__` magic method on the pandas dataframe object.

One thing that we will often want to do when working with tables is select
specific rows. **random rant** from here on out, we will use tables and
dataframes interchangeably.  While I personally don't care which you call it,
most in the data science community would call them data frames and we want to be
cool like them. **back to our regularly scheduled jib-a-jaba**

So, let's say you wanted to grab only the passengers that are over 20
years old.  First, lets check out something super cool.

    D["Age"] > 20

That "series" of booleans is of length number of rows.  For any row in which the age
was greater than 20, we will have a true, else we will have a false.  So that is
pretty nice, but it gets better.  If have a series of trues and falses that is
the same length as a data frame, we can get any row in which the value is true
as.

    D[ D["Age"] > 25 ]

This is probably one of the coolest and most helpful ideas that you can learn
for easily getting subsets of data from a dataframe.   And it doesn't stop
there, you can create some pretty complex query criterion.  In fact, for
those that know SQL, many of the major relational algebra operations are
implemented in the pandas api [See Comparison with SQL for more](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/getting_started/comparison/comparison_with_sql.html).

One other thing to note, sometimes, you just want a few entries of the data for
playing around, you can use

    D.head()

to get the first 5 entries or specify the number that you want with

    D.head(n=15)

Similarly you can get the last few lines with `D.tail()`.


Note that sometimes, you may just want to make a data frame and not have a file
to load in.  In such a case, we can easily make one with the following code that
builds a data frame of colors.  (note that we mix strings and numbers)

    df = pd.DataFrame([
        ['red', 255, 0, 0],
        ['blue', 0, 0, 255],
        ['green', 0, 255, 0],
        ['purple', 127, 0, 255],
    ])
    df.columns=['name', 'R', 'G', 'B']


## Next week
- some good data sets for trying things out
- representing categorical variables
- data visualisation

